# Retail-Sales-Analysis-SQL-Project
The project involves setting up a retail sales database, performing exploratory data analysis (EDA), and answering specific business questions through SQL queries.
## Objectives

1. **Set up a retail sales database**: Create and populate a retail sales database with the provided sales data.
2. **Data Cleaning**: Identify and remove any records with missing or null values.
3. **Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)**: Perform basic exploratory data analysis to understand the dataset.
4. **Business Analysis**: Use SQL to answer specific business questions and derive insights from the sales data.
## Project Structure

### 1. Database Setup

- **Database Creation**: The project starts by creating a database named `p1_retail_db`.
- **Data Import and Preparation**: The `retail_sales` table was generated by importing an Excel dataset directly into MySQL Workbench. After importing, necessary data preparations were made — including assigning a primary key to the `transactions_id` column to ensure each transaction is uniquely identifiable. The dataset includes fields such as sale date, sale time, customer ID, gender, age, product category, quantity sold, price per unit, cost of goods sold (COGS), and total sale amount.This cleaned and structured data served as the basis for all subsequent SQL queries and analysis.

```sql
CREATE DATABASE p1_retail_db;
SELECT * FROM retail_sales;

ALTER TABLE retail_sales
ADD PRIMARY KEY (transactions_id);

```
### 2. Data Exploration & Cleaning

- **Record Count**: Determine the total number of records in the dataset.
- **Customer Count**: Find out how many unique customers are in the dataset.
- **Category Count**: Identify all unique product categories in the dataset.

```sql

SELECT COUNT(*) FROM retail_sales;
SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT customer_id) FROM retail_sales;
SELECT DISTINCT category FROM retail_sales;

```
### 3. Data Analysis & Findings

The following SQL queries were developed to answer specific business questions:

1. **How many Total Records of Sales we have?**:
```sql
SELECT COUNT(total_sale) AS Count_of_total_sale FROM retail_sales;
```

2. **How many unique customers we have?**:
```sql
SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT customer_id) as total_sale FROM retail_sales;
```

3. **Write a SQL query to retrieve all columns for sales made on '2022-11-05**:
```sql
SELECT *
FROM retail_sales
WHERE STR_TO_DATE(sale_date, '%d-%m-%Y') = '2022-11-05';
```

4. **Write a SQL query to retrieve all transactions where the category is 'Clothing' and the quantity sold is more than 4 in the month of Nov-2022**:
```sql
SELECT * FROM retail_sales
WHERE 
    category = 'Clothing'
	AND quantiy >= 4
    AND MONTH(STR_TO_DATE(sale_date, '%d-%m-%Y')) = 11
    AND YEAR(STR_TO_DATE(sale_date, '%d-%m-%Y')) = 2022;  
```

5. **Write a SQL query to calculate the total sales (total_sale) for each category.**:
```sql
SELECT category, SUM(total_sale) as net_sale,COUNT(*) as total_orders
FROM retail_sales
GROUP BY category;
```

6. **Write a SQL query to find the average age of customers who purchased items from the 'Beauty' category.**:
```sql
SELECT ROUND(AVG(age),2) as avg_age
FROM retail_sales
WHERE category = 'Beauty';
```

7. **Write a SQL query to find all transactions where the total_sale is greater than 1000.**:
```sql
SELECT * FROM retail_sales
WHERE total_sale > 1000;
```

8. **Write a SQL query to find the total number of transactions (transaction_id) made by each gender in each category.**:
```sql
SELECT category,gender, COUNT(*) as total_transactions_id
FROM retail_sales
GROUP BY category,gender
ORDER BY 1;
```
9. **Write a SQL query to calculate the average sale for each month.**:
```sql
SELECT 
    EXTRACT(YEAR FROM STR_TO_DATE(sale_date, '%d-%m-%Y')) AS year,
    EXTRACT(MONTH FROM STR_TO_DATE(sale_date, '%d-%m-%Y')) AS month,
    AVG(total_sale) AS avg_sale
FROM retail_sales
GROUP BY year , month 
ORDER BY year, month;
```
10. **Also find out best selling month in each year**:
```sql
SELECT 
    EXTRACT(YEAR FROM STR_TO_DATE(sale_date, '%d-%m-%Y')) AS year,
    EXTRACT(MONTH FROM STR_TO_DATE(sale_date, '%d-%m-%Y')) AS month,
    AVG(total_sale) AS avg_sale
FROM retail_sales
GROUP BY year , month 
ORDER BY avg_sale DESC LIMIT 2;
```

11. **Write a SQL query to find the top 5 customers based on the highest total sales**:
```sql
SELECT customer_id, SUM(total_sale) as total_sales
FROM retail_sales
GROUP BY customer_id
ORDER BY SUM(total_sale) DESC
LIMIT 5;
```

12. **Write a SQL query to find the number of unique customers who purchased items from each category.**:
```sql
SELECT category,COUNT(DISTINCT customer_id) as unique_customer
FROM retail_sales
GROUP BY category;
```

13. **Write a SQL query to create each shift and number of orders (Example Morning <12, Afternoon Between 12 & 17, Evening >17)**:
```sql
SELECT
  CASE
    WHEN HOUR(sale_time) < 12 THEN 'Morning'
    WHEN HOUR(sale_time) BETWEEN 12 AND 17 THEN 'Afternoon'
    ELSE 'Evening'
  END AS shift,
COUNT(*) AS number_of_orders
FROM retail_sales
GROUP BY shift
ORDER BY FIELD(shift, 'Morning', 'Afternoon', 'Evening');
```

## Findings

- **Customer Demographics**: The dataset includes customers from various age groups, with sales distributed across different categories such as Clothing and Beauty.
- **High-Value Transactions**: Several transactions had a total sale amount greater than 1000, indicating premium purchases.
- **Sales Trends**: Monthly analysis shows variations in sales, helping identify peak seasons.
- **Customer Insights**: The analysis identifies the top-spending customers and the most popular product categories.
## Reports

- **Sales Summary**: A detailed report summarizing total sales, customer demographics, and category performance.
- **Trend Analysis**: Insights into sales trends across different months and shifts.
- **Customer Insights**: Reports on top customers and unique customer counts per category.

## Conclusion
This project uses SQL queries for analyzing real-world sales data. From importing data and cleaning it, to writing queries that answered key business questions. The findings from this project can help drive business decisions by understanding sales patterns, customer behavior, and product performance.
